what the research says is that people
who are having sex within a few hours
when they sleep have better markers of
sleep and recovery so does masturbation
not have the same implications well what
was so interesting about this research
is that Kristen Holmes is the vice
president of performance science at wo
who has access to health data from
hundreds of thousands of people and her
groundbreaking research will tell you
the secrets of achieving perfect health
and performance the key to your health
is your tradan Rhythm which are physical
mental and behavioral changes that
happen in a 24-hour cycle one of the
most known circadian rhythms is being
asleep during the night and it has
massive Health consequences for example
we know their shift workers on average
are going to die 15 years sooner but if
you're awake for 2 hours between 10:
p.m. and 4:00 a.m. 2 days per week for
25 days of the year you qualify as a
shift worker you are putting yourself at
increased risk for cancer cardiovascular
disease mental health issues you can
have trouble having children I mean
that's terrifying we know that we
haven't adapted to Blue Light the light
we get from screens yes if you're
viewing light between the hours of 10
p.m. and 4:00 a.m. it actually has a pro
depressive effect it this goes on and on
and a lot of people are like I have to
go to bed at 1:00 a.m. because I'm a
night owl total BS you're making a
choice and if you want to perform
consistently increase your tolerance for
stress and take control of your life you
need to we want to eat and most
importantly we need
to quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to subscribe helps us scale the
guest helps us scale the production and
it makes this show bigger so if I could
ask you for one favor if you've watched
the show before and you've enjoyed it
and you like this episode that you're
currently watching could you please hit
the Subscribe button thank you so much
and I will repay that gesture by making
sure that everything we do here gets
better and better and better and better
that is a promise I'm willing to make
you do we have a
[Music]
deal
Kristen why do you do the work that you
do I am uh irrationally passionate about
human flourishing and the Frameworks
policies basically determinants of of
human flourishing and um yeah I've kind
of dedicated my life
to understanding um how the physiology
and and psychology work together to help
people take control of their health um
so they can understand how to apply
their energy and and attention in a way
that's truly rewarding what is your job
title I'm the vice president of
performance science principal scientist
at uh whoop which is a technology a
physiological monitoring technology
company and what does that mean so I'm
trying to make sure uh whoop is a
thought leader in human performance so
trying to see around the bend to
understand you know what's going to be
important for tomorrow in terms of
understanding uh how we can take control
of the directory of our health you know
what are the markers that are important
that we need to be tracking um what are
the behaviors that we need to be
engaging in in order to move those
metrics around in a way that is Health
promoting I look at a lot of the high
stakes high stress environments so
professional athletes um Frontline
Healthcare CL Ians um and uh you know
military operators so kind of
understanding some of these extreme
professions and and crafts and and what
the physiology and the psychology looks
like we can then kind of abstract and
and and I think in some ways generalize
what that means for the regular
population um who are experiencing less
extreme demands on on their time and
their energy and and their cognitive
bandwidth and you conduct um your own
studies yes yeah so I'm a principal
investigator on um on many studies um
which means that I'm kind of leading
those experiments from kind of A to Z
and I have a team that is you know kind
of supporting that research um and from
various aspects of of expertise um but
yeah I mean one of the studies that we
published in in May was looking at uh a
thousand paratroopers in Army Alaska so
super extreme you know environment you
know harsh but the the Army came to us
they were you know if if you you know
Alaska in general has a very high
suicide rate um this base in elor Alaska
has a lot of mental health issues a lot
of suicide and um they're trying to
understand you know what is actually
going on here and we were able to run a
study where we showed that there's
actually one
Behavior one behavior that was surfaced
that was the most predictive of positive
psychological functioning in these um in
these soldiers and that one Behavior was
sleep wake
timing so the more consistent and more
stable the sleep wake the Sleep onset
and offset of these soldiers um the
higher levels of positive psychological
functioning so work place resilience um
uh less homesickness more feelings of
control more positive social networks it
bubbles up in every single piece of of
research that we do at whoop sleep wake
timing I think is the mother of all
performance optimization behaviors sleep
wake timing so is this the same thing as
your Cadian Rhythm or yeah so this is
one of the most I think when we think
about circadian rhythms which is just
physical mental and behavioral changes
that happen in a 24-hour cycle um and
your biological clock is kind of
orchestrating these rhythms right and
okay so I'm going to have to pause and
take this right back to Monkey level
stuff yeah what is a Arcadian Rhythm as
if you're expending it to a 10-year-old
yeah so it's basically physical mental
and behavioral
changes that happen over a 24-hour cycle
okay so here's my read on it and correct
me if I'm
wrong there's a clock in my head yes the
the the supermatic nucleus yeah is a is
the Master Clock okay which is somewhere
in my body it's in the it's in the
hypothalamus so it's in my brain and
this clock regulates every cell in my
body cell tissue organ okay and it
releases it controls the release of a
chemical which makes those cells organs
every part of my body do stuff yeah so
it is your hypothalamus so the superism
nucleus it responds to light and it
responds to Darkness okay okay so that's
like the most pronounced entrainment cue
for this master clock and it then tells
it sends signals to every cell tissue in
your body as to what it needs to be
doing in the presence of light in the
presence of darkness and when we are
viewing light at a phase of the natural
light dark cycle that is if I am awake
when I should be sleeping or I am
sleeping when I should be awake when my
body anticipates that it causes huge
amounts of stress in the system if we do
this once or twice not a big deal but if
we're doing this
chronically okay it has massive Health
consequences you know cancer um
metabolic disease um you know
cardiovascular disease 100% of mental
health issues there will be some level
of circadian disruption okay so when
this inform this light information comes
in
and tells these clocks to what to do if
I am going outside of my natural
biological
preferences that is circadian
disruption and if and if you think about
how many folks are walking around
circadian disruption it is mind-blowing
I mean basically the the kind of the
definition that's been thrown out there
is if you are awake from the hours of 10
p.m. to 4 a.m. if you're awake for 2
hours between 10: p.m. and 4:00 a.m. for
2 days per week for 25 days of the year
you qualify as a kind of card carrying
shift worker and you likely have
significant circadian disruption which
means that I have you are at risk for
some of the and it you know it's not
going to happen tomorrow but if you
continue on that pattern that I just
described red you are putting yourself
at increased risk
for cancer and cardiovascular disease
metabolis dysfunction um you know you
can have trouble having children it
impacts fertility mental health
psychiatric disorders there isn't
disease or disorder that circadian
disruption doesn't
touch so a way of thinking about this um
so that I and everyone else can
understand is there's this master clock
in our um hypothalamus look at me um
hypothalamus and this Master Clock
regulates all of the other clocks
throughout our entire body and there's
millions of them right basically yes and
the thing that's the Master Clock is
using as a signal the clock in our brain
is light and darkness that's its most
reliable yes that's the signal it cares
about it listens to the most but there's
other signals as well and if that Master
Clock if so if I'm if I'm up at 4:00
a.m. and I'm looking at a a light at
4:00 a.m. that Master Clock is going to
start firing off chemicals to all the
other clocks um and then all the clocks
are going to be out of sync because then
when I wake up it's light and then you
know you're confusing I'm confusing my
body and it's firing off in all kinds of
different ways so I need to form an
alignment which means basically sleeping
at the right time exposing myself to
Darkness at the right time etc etc your
body loves regularity and and that's and
the problem is modity is not set up for
that you know we have access you know I
think all the Circadian research um
unfortunately was done after the Advent
of electri electricity so so we're kind
of fighting you know this access to
constant light um and you know we're
starting to see the the I think dilar
effects or the the negative consequences
of exposure to light really after the
sun goes down we haven't adapted to blue
light after dark right after the sun
goes down we have not adapted to blue
light blue light being the light we get
from screens yes there was a study that
looked at the timing of light and its
impact on um mood and and brain circuit
circuits and they saw that if you're
viewing light between the hours of again
this is kind of this magic window of
time 10 p.m. and 4: a.m. it actually has
a pro depressive
effect so it impacts your dopamine
system reward motivation right so when
we wonder you know oh why are why what
is this Mental Health crisis I mean we
have to look at light first and I and I
just don't know and and I think what's
hard about the discussion and hard about
this behavior is
that you know it it's really hard for
people to not engage with their phones
you know before bed um that has its own
addictive properties right but we just
have to understand that these our our
relationship to light will directly
influence the trajectory of our health
there's just no question about that
to understand this from a more sort of
prehistoric ancestoral lens if we go
back I don't know tens of thousands of
years to how maybe some of our ancestors
used to live they would have food at
certain times and they would have light
exposure at certain times they didn't
have artificial light right they had
invented that yet the modern world is
very much the antithesis of that it is
we have food whenever we want it we can
order I can order a cookie at 3:00 a.m.
if I want to eat cookie at 3 a.m. and I
can watch YouTube video the D CEO for
example like And subscribe at any hour
of the day um so is this kind of like a
misalignment issue with our the way our
body was designed by nature and the
world we now live in yeah we have not
evolved to to to digest food in the
middle of the night or or to view light
in the middle of the night um or to be
super active in the middle of the night
which just happen and it does it creates
this it creates this misalignment and
you know I think what's interesting if
we are to kind of look at individuals
you know or societies currently that
don't have
electricity it's it's really interesting
to to I think see some of their
behaviors some of their sleep wake
behaviors and this is fascinating there
is a study done looking at um kind of a
hunter gatherer type of society who
don't have access to any electricity and
when you observe their sleep wake times
they all fall asleep within 15 to 30
minutes of each other and they all wake
up between 15 and 30 minutes of each
other so this whole notion of
chronotypes is like kind of like total
BS It's like because I think that's you
know I think that's the reason a lot of
people are like oh I I I have to go to
bed at 1: a.m. because I'm a night owl
no you're you're making a choice
generally speaking now this is in
healthy populations not people who have
circadian you know disorders and and
things like that um generally speaking
like if you were to throw everyone in
this building on a mountain in Colorado
and this experiment has actually been
done with no electricity we will
literally all fall asleep within 30
minutes of each other after 48 Hours
like that is how powerful these light
dark signals are to our body and I I
think that just those two examples are
really compelling in that you know we're
we have evolved to kind of wake up and
fall asleep in relation to This Light
Dark cycle so what are this stuff we say
to ourselves because I say that to
myself all the time I told I've told
myself I'm a nightow yeah and I've given
myself the whole chronotype Spiel yeah
that's be
yeah in my opinion the way I interpret
the
literature it it seems that you know the
the variability that I think is talked
about or how we think about it in as a
as a society in terms of there's
chronotypes that are you know very you
know you're you fall asleep you want to
you you're genetically predisposed to
fall asleep at 1:00 am and I'm
genetically predisposed to to fall
asleep at 9:00 P p.m. yeah I I don't
think it's that kind of variability I
think the variability maybe is an hour
at the most maybe an hour and a half
obviously it's age related as well um
but for the most part I don't I don't
think this variability is is as
pronounced as as as what um what we say
it is sleep yeah so conventional wisdom
says it's all about how many hours you
spend
sleeping we already this has already
been shown to be not true sleep
duration is is important right we can
put a pin in that um but sleep
regularity predicts all cause mortality
and this is just recently published
actually um not by my team but um
looking at it was actually UK uh uh
biobank 60,000 people 10 million sleeps
objective measure of sleep and they
found that sleep regularity predicted uh
mortality and independent of sleep
duration so it it's not to say that
sleep duration doesn't matter but that
is absolutely incomplete advice how much
time you spend in bed does doesn't
necessarily predict how long you live it
is the degree to which you stabilize
when you go to bed and when you wake up
that predicts mortality what did they
find what what was the conclusion of
that was there a sort of a percentage
variance in those that have irregular
and regular sleep yeah so the Sleep
onset offset times I'm I'm not sure but
actually this is research that my team
is doing and that we have not published
yet so this is preliminary data but we
are we're actually able to determine
down to the
minute what is a tolerable level of
variability so for the most elite
athletes on the planet the
0.001% 18 to 23 year olds we know that
um 70 minutes of onset offset
variability at 70 minutes we will see a
sharp decline in markers of recovery
heartly variability resting heart rate
which is a indicator of how you will
adapt to load the next day to stress the
next day to stress the next day so life
load so sleep awake time is really
important and we're we're we're doing
research across across every age bucket
and and but you can imagine that if
these are the most robust humans on the
planet and they have 70 minutes of of
variability that is tolerable within
that population some are a little bit
sooner um in terms of the or uh can deal
with less variability others can deal
with slightly more variability but the
mean is 70 70 minutes so you can imagine
for individuals who are more vulnerable
who have less are less robust physically
mentally emotionally their tolerable
level is going to be much
narrower what's going on inside of the
body when we increase the variability or
that we don't have a regular sleep and a
regular wake up time what's actually
going on from like a chemical
physiological perspective yeah so one of
the things that's suppressed is
melatonin
and circulating reductions in
circulating melatonin have been shown to
be linked to every disorder and
disease in the
body every disorder and disease in the
body when we have suppressed or reduced
circulating melatonin that is going to
impact us on every level and make us
more vulnerable to disease and and
disorders so that is probably one of the
most important thing when we have super
unstable sleep awake time we are going
to uh have cell suppressed melatonin
production um which leads to
inflammation in the body it's melatonin
I think is is one of the big players in
the story growth hormones yes yes and uh
typically you know if you're not going
to sleep uh if you're going to sleep
late you will not release a human growth
hormone um as uh you'll get less of a
Bolis of of release and why does that
matter that's when all the physical
restoration happens so all the
Regeneration physically so for bypassing
that we're basically all the work that
we did in the gym or you know everything
that we did during the day um we're just
not going to recover um from that in in
the same way that we would if we were
getting that sleep is growth hormone
essentially the thing that causes our
sort of muscles to grow and repair
essentially so I sometimes think this
because I think if I'm sometimes in my
life because I'm quite busy I have to
make the decision whether to go to the
gym or get a great night's sleep yeah
and the more I've learned about growth
hormone in the body and whoop and all
those things I've started to make the
decision towards sleep versus going to
the gym because my brain now goes well
you're not going to get the recovery and
sort of restoration anyway benefits yeah
the benefits of going to the gym if
you're poorly slept that night yep I
think if it's um if you're consistently
getting you know decent sleep and
consistently getting you know going to
bed and wake up some more times um you
know I would say it's okay to prioritize
exercise sometimes um but sleep is is
very important um and is probably the
thing that needs to be prioritized
first how consistent are you with your
sleep I'm very consistent I heard that
in 2017 you started trying to sleep
within sort of 25 to 30
minutes um every single day y the same
sleeping window that's right yeah and
yeah it was a it was a paper that came
out uh by Andrew Phillips actually in in
the summer of 2017 and it basically was
a four-year study um that was conducted
at Harvard University looking at
students and they were basically
students sleep and they're trying to see
okay you know what aspect of of sleep is
is predictive of things like GPA and um
other uh you know measures of of kind of
uh flourishing and uh what they found is
that basically sleep weight time
predicted
GPA what's GPA for people oh sorry grade
point average yes so it's the difference
you know they more regular you know it's
the difference between getting an A and
A B um by just stabilizing sleep awake
time and so at that time I was working
with you know tons of Collegiate
athletes so nc2a athletes professional
athletes so eppl um you know NBA NFL
MLB you name it like the biggest high
performers like in the world and and I
started tracking this you know just
manually at the time at whoop we didn't
actually track this uh this wasn't
automated I had to like you know kind of
do this in Excel and then sure enough
you know sleep wake time started
predicting all these performance metrics
that people care about and um we started
rolling in some subjective measures um
we had internal load we had external
load of course so all the objective
measures but I started rolling in some
subjective measures and sure enough
sleep awake time just continued to to to
ladder up to all these performance
variables that people care about so I
started of course you know because I
have access to all these these data I
start I'm like I need to I need to
like start stabilizing my sleep wake
time and sure enough summer 2017 I just
like that's basically like my
non-negotiable and yeah I mean I I
haven't I haven't been sick since
2017 I had a little tiny head cold that
lasted 48 hours but since then I
literally have not had a sniffle a
stomach ache I didn't get covid like I
literally have not been sick and you
know there I do a lot of other things
well but that has been the single
biggest change just sleeping and waking
up at the same time that's it what is
your routine there how do you ensure
that happens because yeah so the the key
to that is stabilizing when I wake up so
even when I travel and I do travel and I
I travel internationally I travel to the
West Coast um I try to maintain my home
time zone as much as I can as long as I
can fulfill my business commitments and
and social you know there might be a
social element as well but for the most
part um I stabilize when I wake up so I
keep that consistent even if I can't go
to bed at the same time I ensure that I
wake up at the same time and that
basically sets my circadian rhythm so I
will then feel sleepy at the right time
and I can kind of keep that virtuous
cycle going if I um have short sleep I
just basically try to build in a nap
prior to 1:30 for 30 minutes to an hour
so I don't accumulate sleep debt is
another thing that we can talk about
sleep DT is wild in some of its
correlations like psychological safety
and executive function and um but but
yeah so I kind of that's how I manage
short sleep um but I I always try to
wake up at the same time so I'm getting
that Bolis of light at the same time
every single day and what time do you
wake up and go to sleep so I go to bed
um around I kind of get into bed usually
around
9915 9:30 I read for a half an hour 45
minutes
a book um printed page dim light um and
then I fall asleep usually around 10 and
then I wake up um like at 6 uh 14 no I'm
just kidding like around six around 6
you know whenever I talk about these
subjects the rebuttal I get is one you
might be able to predict it's from a
group of people that I can't yet relate
to yeah do you know who I'm talking
about um parents oh yeah yeah well
I've had I have two kids so I totally
understand the whole parenting thing so
yeah I mean there's no question there
are going to be times in your life where
you're literally a shift worker because
you're caring for a sick parent or a
sick child or you just literally have
kids and they're young um you're a shift
worker I mean there there are things um
you're making decisions to go out and
and and socialize in in times that maybe
maybe aren't optimal for kind of human
functioning but yes there's there's no
question that there are periods in your
life where it's going to be harder um
that said there are some things that you
can do to mitigate some of the negative
effects of both Direction and timing and
one of those those things is um is
dialing in your feeding window which is
another kind of circadian Behavior so
the timing of when you eat is is pretty
important um and can at least check some
of the boxes in terms of its impact on
uh metabolic functioning and and her
health and things like that so let's
talk about that then meal timing mhm
what is the what do I need to know about
when I should be eating what I should be
eating um and the implications that has
on yeah my circadian rhythm my body
yeah so it's it's in the
literature there's time restricted
eating and there's time restricted
feeding um and time restricted feeding
generally if you're reading the
literature is going to refer to Mouse
models time to eating will refer to
human uh studies Mouse models being
studies they yes sorry um yeah mice the
studies done with with mice are just
time restricted feeding and and
uh humans would be time restrict to
eating and not to confuse this with
intermittent fasting which I know is a
Hot Topic and people love talking about
it um Tim restricted eating basically
has a cading component so it's really
about the timing of when you're eating
your food in relation to the light dark
cycle intermittent fasting is basically
just reducing calories and so tempting
does not have a calorie um uh component
to it it's more about the the timing and
there's been some a lot of interesting
studies um that have been done that show
if you eat you know within uh you know
kind of 8 to 12h hour window uh you will
have uh much better metabolic outcomes
and this is pretty this is well
established um and I and if we see in
the whoop data that if you're um if you
stop eating three hours prior to when
you sleep to when you fall asleep
markers of sleep and Recovery are are uh
exponentially better um so timing of
meals really really does matter and
there's no question that uh and we we
know this from from other research
you're more primed to metabolize food um
closer to when you wake up in the
morning so earlier in the day you're
going to be much more primed to utilize
the the nutrients that you're um that
you've digested so does that mean we
should be eating we should have sort of
an earlier EA window yes yes you know
Brian Johnson of course yeah I know he
stops eating at 11:00 a.m. which is
crazy so which is insane and not super
practical but I think if you can stop
eating around when the sun sets you'll
position yourself to improve your
metabolic health and I and I would go so
far to say that you know regardless of
what it is you're eating because a lot
of folks cannot afford to you know eat
high quality food that's just a reality
and a lot of those folks do suffer from
you know at higher rates of C CIO
metabolic dysfunction but if if we can
just consolidate our eating window to 8
to 10 hours we get ourselves like 60% of
the way to our our kind of metabolic
goals again it's not to say that content
and quality does not matter it
absolutely does but if we aren't going
to if if we if we can't focus on that
for whatever it might be consolidating
our eating window so eating every single
one of our calories between you know an
8 to 12 hour window we will improve our
health and what's your eating window so
I do about 10 hours okay yeah so I I
definitely I pretty much don't eat after
the sun goes down when you say the sun
goes down sun sets yeah is that like
5:00 p.m. I mean now it's early yeah so
I give myself like an hour window yeah
like four right now it's it's definitely
early but um but for the most part I can
kind of get away with it based on my
lifestyle so ideally between sort of 7:
a.m. and 4 p.m. and then to make sure
you're not eating you know two to three
hours before you fall asleep yes that's
the big key I think um is is you want a
nice big buffer
between uh yeah when you when you have
your L calorie and and when you go to
sleep because
that they're both so digestion is a
parasympathetic activity what does that
right so that means so your autonomic
nervous system has two brand is your
parasynthetic and and your sympathetic
your parasynthetic is your rest and
digest right um we also want to be in a
parasynthetic state when we're sleeping
so when we are digesting food we're
basically kind of confusing our system
in terms of where it should apply its
resources right so it basically diverts
resources away from you know the sleep
and the restoration and and that's what
you know if you have a big meal you'll
notice your heart rate is really is a
lot higher right and your stress score
is higher right some of the features on
on the whoop app and when you are not
having to digest you'll see your stress
score is lower you'll see your heart
your your heart rate is lower your heart
rate variability would be higher in
those situations we want to make sure
that when we're sleeping we are not
diverting any resources away from sleep
I mean alcohol is another one right like
you just to metabolize alcohol you're
diverting all you know significant
resources away from the Regeneration and
the recovery that needs to happen during
sleep um by bouncing you out of deeper
stages of sleep so same sort of effect
happens with food and we see this you
know at population levels on the app
it's just very apparent that meal timing
and alcohol are are really the two
biggest disruptors to a good night's
sleep so interesting because I've always
wondered there was a time in my life
where I routinely ate super late at
night because I would work very very
hard during the day I would basically
forget to eat I'd get home
maybe 9 or 10 at night I would then
order the food yeah at 9 or 10 which
means it comes at 11 12 and then I'd eat
at 11 or 12 yeah it's very stressful for
your system yeah tell me about it the
interesting thing that I started to
notice was when when I did that I woke
up feeling like I hadn't slept yeah and
I've always wondered why so I arrived at
this own sort of self self constructed
conclusion that if I put food into my
body at midnight it basically keeps my
body on for a couple of hours yeah
that's exactly right that's a perfect
way to describe it I would see the the
exactly that in the loop data which is I
would see that my heart rate went up to
about 70 beats per minute for the first
3 hours it was almost like my body was
was still walking around or something
still and then 3 or 4 hours in it would
start to fall again back to I don't know
45 the food yeah and we know you know
there's there's a really nice study that
looked at basically everyone is eating
the exact same meals and they're
relatively the same age like it was a
really beautiful design um and they
basically looked at folks who are eating
after after 3 p.m. and folks who are
eating before 3 p.m. and the folks who
ate a bulk of their calories before 3
p.m. had um significantly better
metabolic outcomes and lost more weight
um so again there's no calorie
restriction component here you know
they're all kind of eating similar diet
similar macronutrient distribution
similar calorie content and um and it's
the folks who were eating bulk calories
prior to 3 P.M who had the best outcomes
exercise
one of the issues that I have sometimes
in my life today is one of those days
where because I was up very early this
morning it meant that I didn't go to the
gym this morning which means I'm
probably going to get home after being
in the studio being at the office today
at maybe 78 p.m. and I'm super hungry
then usually right and I also need to
work out so sometimes what happens is I
choose to work out first and then
obviously it makes the meal late at
night but there's also days in my life
where I end up working out and I'm known
for this at like 11: or 12: p.m. at
night wow
and there was this old train of thought
that that was a good thing to do because
people would say oh you're going to be
tired when you get in bed but that's
doesn't seem to be what happens yeah
does it do you feel more energized I
feel more energized yeah well not
surprising right you know adrenaline
cortisol like all of the kind of
hormones and chemicals that you need to
kind of get to a place where you can
exert that energy are are kind of
flowing through the system and it takes
time for them to go back to to normal
levels so to kind of get back to
homeostasis is going to take some time
and and so yeah I mean it would make
sense that you're um you know kind of
activated um after exercise so for some
folks there is a lot of individual
variability I think with exercise timing
some people are impacted more but I
honestly think that it has more to do
with the light you know usually if we're
in a gym it's generally well lit right
you're not in a dark gym so you're
getting exposure to um to light which is
going to make you feel like more
activated and it's again telling your
body that it's time to be awake and
alert on that point of light there's a
school of thought that says you should
look at lights when you wake up in the
morning my my partner always gets up in
the morning walks out into the balcony
and sits out there for 10 or 20 minutes
in morning I love that yes I love to
hear that yeah she's the best so
annoying she gets everything right oh I
love it um yeah but but for sure that
you want to get Light Within you know
100,000 lucks is is pretty much what you
want to get within you know 5 to 20
minutes of waking up to tell your body
like it's time to go 100,000 more oh Lux
so just like Photon energy so pretty
much if you're outside for five to to 20
minutes it sounds like your girlfriend
is like nailing this protocol you'll get
all of the photon energy that you need
to tell your system that it is time to
be awake can't you just go look into a
lamp or something um it will just take
longer because it doesn't have the same
light intensity but if you're waking up
you know prior to when the sun gets up
yeah Turn All the Lights you know you
want to try to mimic day as much as
possible and then once the sun does come
up it's good to get outside and before
you get in bed you referenced that you
read books versus being on an iPad or
screens Etc
um does the same philosophy and
principle apply to light exposure before
sleep as to food exposure before sleep
oh no question right absolutely um we
want to try to restrict light basically
after the sun goes down we want to dim
our home environment to the degree that
we can um we want to try to minimize all
artificial light in the lead up to bed
all artificial light yes yeah you want
to make it as dim as possible so you
know they're a lot of night like blue
light blocking glasses the filters that
you can put on your iPad and your phone
activate all of those um but but again
like we don't we want to protect our
melatone release right and for all the
reasons I kind of have explained when we
don't have it is linked to every disease
and disorder right so we we know this so
we want to protect our melatonin release
and the only way we can Rel
melatonin is by Darkness we we need to
be exposed to to Darkness in order for
that Master Clock in our brain to know
that it's time to go to sleep um and
again be able to tell our body our
tissues and organs and cells and our and
our body what it needs to do at that
moment when I was at the
headquarters in Boston um not so long
ago I saw them working on sleep masks
and I think I've always been quite
dubious about sleep masks you know you
get on those planes and they hand you a
sleep mask in the little bag I always
what a bunch of weirdos you know like
putting that strapping that thing to
your face how embarrassing I'm one of
those weirdos now yeah I mean it's hard
even the Little Dot on your you know
from your alarm clock or your TV is
going to emit enough light we're so
sensitive to
light artificial light so natural light
like the moon totally fine but any other
type of light is really going to impair
our ability to get into these deeper
stages of sleep where all the restor
restoration and regeneration happens do
you use a sleep mask I do yes what's
your sort of routine there um yeah just
when I start to feel sleepy I just put
it on and go to bed do you listen to
anything when you go to sleep no I don't
is there are you aware of any research
that might indicate that listening to
serial killer documentaries at 3:00
a.m. I think in principle anything that
activates you uh stimulates
you cognitively or um makes you energize
you probably want to avoid reading yeah
interesting I think there's a group of
us out there I'm yet to meet them but I
but I know that I'm not alone that I
like to listen to Horror and Thriller
and serial killer stuff at um you know
very late at night and it helps us to
sleep or at least that's what we tell
ourselves I think if you perceive it as
helpful it probably is you know and I
think that's where and if your objective
data shows that you're getting you know
the requisite time in these deeper
stages of sleep then go with it I think
I think what is actually there's
definitely the cold dark quiet right you
need your room to be cold you need to be
dark you need to be quiet so there's
environmental stuff you need to um you
know stop eating a few hours before bed
ideally um you need to have stable sleep
wake time ideally these are all things
that are going to drive getting into
these deeper stages of sleep but the
other thing that you probably do really
well is you manage stress throughout the
day you know like you I think that's
another like the things that we do
during the day how we you know whether
or not we're living our values right do
our behaviors align with with things
that we care about are we thinking about
the things that we want to be thinking
about are we managing our relationships
effectively so all the things that can
manifest as stress negative stress um
will invariably rear its head during our
sleep but if we're managing those things
during the day proactively and
relatively well generally speaking like
sleep should happen you know pretty
naturally there's a huge group of people
who listen to podcasts like this and as
they listen to these podcasts they just
feel more depressed about their
situation you know because they've they
believe they're trying their very best
and they're still struggling especially
as it relates to sleep and I think I've
always wondered what the message one can
send to them and also you know I think
there is a huge component of sort of
personal responsibility and choice that
you speak about as well and that I
believe in as
well but what is the most compelling
message for those people that do have a
choice they they know deep and side much
of it is a lack of discipline they know
they could not watch YouTube they know
they could put their phone away at 9:00
p.m. they know they could not eat the
cookie super late at night they know
they could deep down they know they
could make a different set of choices
but they listen to these podcasts over
and over again whenever I have the
health experts on maybe they even take
notes but they just don't do it yeah
what is the most
compelling thing you can say to those
people that do have a choice but
continually choose a bad option to get
them pushed over the fence to
the positive circadian rhythm body clock
loving side yeah so if people are trying
to
develop new habits you have to
understand how that new habit links to
your values so the things that you
believe in the things that you say you
care about right if I know growth and
impact are my two most important values
presence is another one how what do I
need to do every single day to back into
that so I can align my behaviors with
the things I say I care
about and I think when folks are
struggling um they don't really know who
they want to be in the world and they
don't maybe understand exactly what it
is that they value they're fuzzy about
their desires about their values and I
think you end up when you're fuzzy about
your desires and things you value end up
you're flinging yourself in all sorts of
directions emotionally physically
mentally right and and I think that's
kind of the project is figure out what
you care about and then align your
behaviors and create outlets in your
life and that frankly might
mean getting rid of people you know who
don't support those values and and I
think we're way too lenient on our
circle of friends um and in the sense of
you you know I think
we we keep people around in our life who
don't NE necessarily help us become a
better version of ourselves have you had
to shed some people yes
absolutely why did you shed them because
it it didn't really support who I wanted
to be who did you want to be um I wanted
to be able to wake up at a very simple
level with as much joy and energy as I
as I could and I I want to be present
for my kids and
um yeah
so and and and so I think and and I
think folks are
engaging in behaviors that
um I think you know create um a
situation
where
yeah I don't know how to say this that
like just say
it yeah I
mean I think you know for me um you know
I I grew up in a in a household where
you know my mom was an
alcoholic um you it was a tough
environment and um you know she ended up
you know dying of therosis and um you
know it's not easy you know
so being in that kind of environment so
I think for me you know you end up
um it's it's crazy how when you when you
live that life you end up repeating
those patterns and and I
think you know I had I had
to you know even though for me
personally I made choices where you know
I I I really have never drank alcohol
right because I saw how it destroyed my
family
and but yet I was still hanging around
with people who were engaging these
behaviors and and it just was impacting
me at my core and um it didn't mean that
I didn't love those folks but I had to
get away um you know and a lot of this
was you know related to you know I was
an environment at at a university where
you know that was just like the norm
like it is just wild to me how
educational institutions normalize binge
drinking at a level that is just so
destructive and you know and just to be
I suppose to just be around that all the
time like was just really not allowing
me to to show up daily as the person
that I wanted to be even though I wasn't
engaging in that behavior like it's
still like it just yeah it just made me
feel um um like I couldn't be the
version of myself that I wanted to be so
yeah just it's a lot of hard decisions
you know but um but I let go of a lot
you know to to be able to create an
Environ and infrastructure that
supported who I wanted to be in this
world when I talk about being able
to change your behavior and break a
habit it is nothing in the context of
someone who is INS snared by an
addiction of sorts it is nothing it's a
completely different conversation yeah
what is it like growing up with a mother
who You observe at a very young age you
how old I mean my whole life your whole
life yeah like
she as a child when you when you see a
parent someone you
love that is in that is sort of grip by
addiction what is that
like yeah I mean I think at a at a
fundamental level
um you just feel deprioritized I think
generally you know like you you know I
think you
feel
um you know you're you're you're
unsupervised number
one there isn't a lot of supervision you
know so you end up like really having to
to offend for yourself um my dad worked
a lot you know he was definitely
workolic um such a good man um so much
integrity and and but I think that was
his form of Escape but it kind of leads
you know you got to figure out how to
eat you got to you know you got to
figure out how to do a lot of the basic
stuff on your own so you develop a lot
of Independence I think but it it's hard
to um you know form emotional
attachments I think um as an adult
unless you really work through that you
know because you're you're afraid that
you're not going to be taken care
of what did you come to understand about
your mother's addiction and what she was
struggling with if anything at
all yeah I mean I think what was so sad
about that time period is is you know I
think it was well understood you know I
think um a lot of those behaviors I
think to degree are normalized and I
don't know that there the connection
between depression you know she was no
she she had massive seasonal effect
disorder which one of the reasons why
I'm so interested in you know um kind of
everything related to to light and and
just the opportunity there for for for
health but um you know she had major
depressive disorder and you know was not
diagnosed Pro properly I don't even
remember I have no idea if she ever even
went to the doctor to you know to try to
get treated um so you know I I think the
the biggest
thing that I learned is that we can
actually make choices um and and I know
that there are you know when you look at
regions of the brain we understand that
people are predisposed but I think
there's a lot of things that we can we
can actually control to reduce our
vulnerability to um to some of these
diseases how has that experience defined
and shaped you when you look back and
connect
dots yeah I mean I just always you I was
very competitive high level a athlete
representing um the US and and so
there's definitely trying to understand
my own body and my psychology so I could
perform my potential but there's no
question that like this whole everything
that like underpins the work that I do
is is trying to to understand you know
how we
can improve our own situation so we can
um you know self actualize and and live
our potential and um so that was I
always you know
felt um so bad you know for my
mom
why you know that she wasn't able to
become the
version of
herself like I wasn't able to realize
her
potential and she had so
much
I can't believe you did this to
[Laughter]
me would you like a tissue
thanks you're very um you're a very
special person and it all makes makes
ton of sense why you've got such an
incredible incredible drive and Mission
to you I didn't I didn't know any of
those what You' just said but I've never
talked about that public so I'm just
yeah what a what a wonderful way to have
channeled such a
unimaginable pain to then sort of fix
you know hundreds of thousands of
people's other lives and help them get
closer towards their own potential yeah
I and I I never want to like project my
values onto other folks
but but I think that's always been like
a the core of like why I do what I I do
is and the reason why I coached for so
long is I just love seeing people like
realize their potential or understand
their potential knowing that we're
always of course a work in progress but
I just like I want like everyone to be
able to wake up and
feel you know be energetic and and be
able to like really really live the
things that you you care about you know
and and just and understanding I think
the path to that you know requires some
work you know in terms of making sure
that you're attending to some of these
non-negotiables that we're talking about
and I think sometimes it takes folks
time to connect those dots and there's a
lot of wonderful learning that comes
with that but I think if I can kind of
help accelerate some of that wisdom and
keep people from experiencing I think
some of the pain that I felt you know
it's worth it to me it's the most incred
incredible incredible thing that you've
committed your life to because me and
you are both aware that there's going to
be a ton of people who are either on a
path towards such an addiction or are
currently enthralled by such an
addiction and the work that you're doing
the message you're spreading is going to
prevent and lift some of those people
out of that situation which has has a
wonderful karmic effect on the world and
I think if there's anything that we can
convert our pain into it is it is
exactly that I want to talk about
alcohol I've recently quit drinking
alcohol I think it was about 3 to four
months ago now um it was so interesting
I had a conversation with some of my
best friends I said this on a podcast a
couple of couple of months ago and one
of my friends was an alcoholic so he
managed to um quit alcohol and he's
writing a book about it and then as I
look across the group of my other
friends none of them are alcoholics but
they're all sort of casual Drinkers and
we were sat there together around this
table having dinner and he was telling
us about this he's writing about
quitting alcohol and I was at there
thinking that book that he's writing
doesn't necessarily resonate with me
because I've never had I've never felt
like I've had an addiction or really to
be honest any problem with it yeah I am
such I was such a casual drinker I would
have maybe one glass of wine a week if
that there's probably months I've gone
without any alcohol at all so I couldn't
think of a reason to quit so really I
was saying to him is there another book
that someone else could write for me
that just takes those people that are
those casual drinkers that are right on
the fence and just gives us a reason to
nudge over the other side and because I
have this podcast I thought you know
I'll just try and quit and see if see
what the implications are for my
life alcohol Health circadian
rhythms what are you what's your
perspective on all of this well I I like
to think about it I love this the the
principle of non-neutrality
right and and this is
is how I like to think about behaviors
and and how I've kind of always thought
about it is if you've got a series of
behaviors we talked a lot about about
sleep um and and you know physiological
things and you've got the psychological
things and they're either going to
support your your values kind of who you
want to be in this world or they're not
and and I think that's the lens with
which I look at alcohol you know in what
way is this supporting my values of
growth and impact and and presence and
compassion and um tolerance you know the
the things that are like core to who I
want to be in this world and and I think
when you look at it through that lens
the choices become really clear to me um
if you're honest with yourself and you
have some degree of
self-awareness understand what you care
about I think choices become a lot
clearer like there's way way more
clarity about how to live your life um
in in the micro which is really what
we're talking about these just many
choices throughout the day does it does
it does it support who you want to be in
the world or does it not and and there's
very little gray actually and the gray
are excuses in in my view and and we can
rationalize and make stuff all you know
all day long right to to to make
ourselves feel better but when you can
step back from all of that and look at
it really you know taking yourself kind
of out of the equation and look at it
from a a very objective standpoint um
you know I think a choice like alcohol
becomes very
clear but it helps me to socialize
Kristen yeah if if you need alcohol to
bond or
to you know form a
connection there's probably something
else going on that is unaddressed in
from my perspective is that such a thing
as such a small dose of alcohol that it
doesn't
matter in your opinion yeah I mean I
think it depends on who you are um and I
I think there's a lot of individual
variability there as as well I know R
Resveratrol is is something that's
talked about a lot and there's
uh you know suppose there's in wine and
grapes there's ratol and that's been
linked to um enhanced uh health and
well-being but I think you'd have to
drink like 10 b or something to get the
amount of resp respirol to actually make
a um uh to to make a dent I don't think
that's the argument um so yeah I don't
know that really any amount of alcohol
is is going to be is going to be helpful
and we know from the literature that
just one to two drinks per week uh will
can have you know negative implications
um on on health so um it's actually I
don't know that any like even in a
moderate amount of alcohol is good for
you what's the implications for our
Cadian rhythms that we've been talking
about yeah it's mainly because it
impacts sleep it's going to impact when
you go to bed and when you wake up um so
I think that's the biggest the biggest
impact and I think again when we go back
to
melatonin um you know it's when you're
disrupting that that sleep onet offset
um that's going to uh obviously have all
the downstream negative effects that we
we've already spoken about so I suppose
if we're drinking we're staying out
later so we're exposing ourselves to to
light um so yeah there's lots of uh
we're going to be eating later uh
there's other um behaviors that
accompany drinking that kind of you know
pile on the the negative effects I was
reading some research from the Sleep
foundation and it says that a 2007 study
with 29 young adults found that moderate
doses of alcohol up to 1 hour before
bedtime reduced Mel Onin production by
nearly
20% that's the study on alcohol and
melatonin in young adults a 2018 study
of
4,908 Finnish participants found that
Sleep Quality was was reduced by
99.3% after one glass of wine and by 24%
after two glasses of wine and by almost
40% 39.2% after three or more glasses of
wine or an equivalent amount of alcohol
yeah which is is really really
staggering that your Sleep Quality will
could di 40% after three glasses of wine
oh yeah it's I mean we see it is we just
finished this analysis actually looking
at alcohol and markers of recovery so
heart rate variability and heart rate
and literally with every drink it is
just there's a linear relationship in
the decline like and it is significant
um so I mean yeah it's we're talking
even one drink um will produce
clinically significant reduction in
heart rate and heart R variability this
was maybe the most
compelling motivator for me to quit
alcohol was when I got my whoop the
first time and then I think it was
someone's birthday or something so we
went out and I had a glass of wine or
something I woke I woke up the next day
looked at my heart rate variability
which is the a measure of how well I'm
going to be able to deal with stress and
load and all those things the next day
how well my body's going to be able to
deal with life and it was flashing red
which is like a warning and and it says
on there when I clicked on the flashing
red thing it was like like did you have
a really stressful day are you sick or
did you drink alcohol last night and I
felt so targeted I was like how does
this thing know that I had one glass of
wine last night with my friends why is
something flashing red with inside of me
people keep Diaries on whoop don't they
they keep like the whoop Journal I it's
called yeah so it's a go mine of
information actually really yeah what
have you learned from that in terms of
alcohol I imagine that's where a lot of
the conclusions yeah mean we see a six
per reduction in next day recovery after
alcohol on average so this is you know
one drink to 10 drink you know it's just
basically looking at the the average is
6% okay so theage of okay recovery so if
someone's having if someone was B Bing
drinking it they could have a 30 or 40%
reduction yeah but it kind of and we we
might and and that specific data point
might we might have controlled for you
know the the 30 drinks or you know it's
it's probably somewhere in the range of
five drinks you know per night and and
the average recovery reduction is six 6%
and that's relying on self-reporting
right so I wonder if there's biases in
what there might there might be yeah
people that had 10 drinks think they had
four but I think yeah exactly I don't
really remember how many drinks I had so
yeah any drinks I had interesting super
interesting the other thing we obviously
drink is coffee yes caffeine surely
there's a correlation between circadian
disruption and CA that's definitely one
of the Circadian kind it definitely can
disrupt circadian rhythms if we're
having caffeine you know
within eight to 12 hours I would say of
when we intend to sleep um it's going to
impact our sleep onset of course um and
even if we're you know tired enough
where we have you know we're sleep
deprived um we might might fall asleep
but it will invariably end up disrupting
or fragmenting our sleep so we're not
kind of getting into that deeper stages
of sleep we're not achieving the sleep
quality that um that is going to Le you
know allow us to wake up feeling
restored and refreshed so timing of
caffeine is really important what of
this conversation makes me have a huge
amount of empathy for shift workers oh
and when I say shift workers I don't I
don't mean people working you know
warehouses I mean doctors nurses
firefight
firefighters the police um truck
drivers people that are baking yeah
anyone who's up between the hours of you
know for more than two hours between the
hours of 10 P p.m. and 4 a. is
considered a shift worker so it's yes
there's a lot of a lot of individuals
walking around who are shift workers but
people who are you know literally up
during the biological night um you know
it's it's a huge sacrifice we know those
folks on average are going to die 15
years sooner it is you know shift work
is considered a carcinogen by the World
Health Organization it's you know shift
work is um those folks make an enormous
sacrifice they're going to die 15 years
sooner on
average I mean that's terrifying I
know is anybody is anybody trying to Sol
for that yeah I mean that's a lot of the
work that I do is is looking at shift
work you know and trying to understand
you know what other levers you know can
we deploy to offset some of the the the
impact of of being awake during the the
biological night and you know time
eating as a lever you know really
thinking about when we're eating protein
um you know when we're viewing light
um you know what what do the what's the
Cadence of of of you know on off um so
we minimize the disruption dadian
rhythms I mean the fact is like the
roster size at these hospitals are just
simply not big enough to be able to uh I
think deploy schedules that mitigate
some of the the risk associated with
this disrupted circadian rhythm but it
is frightening and um you know there is
a lot of work to try to understand how
we can mitigate some of the the negative
effects but it's it's it's it's a tough
problem to solve it's not just I guess
it's not just that those individuals
will die you know on average 15 years
earlier but their quality of life I
imagine won't be as good because if
they're not sleeping yeah consistently
it'ser
fol these profs you know who are having
to operate counter to the Natural Light
Dark cycle so let's talk about that then
mental health depression
suicidality what's the correlation there
between yeah so there's a lot of
interesting research I mean you know one
is just you know we talk about just the
lay person so getting outside of shift
work we come back to shift work you know
if you look at um this most folks
experience social jet lag right which is
basically characterized as um you know a
a big a difference between our weekday
sleep schedule and our weekend sleep
schedule right so pretty much anyone you
know between 20 20 to 30 probably is you
know kind of falls into this bucket of
of having social jet lag but one of the
things that we one a research study we
saw looking at specifically a social jet
lag in and college students they saw
that for every hour of variability
between week day and weekend schedules
they saw a 177% increase in non-suicidal
ideation so these folks aren't
committing suicide but they're
fantasizing about committing suicide and
that increases 17% and this was more
pronounced than individuals who were
already
vulnerable so kind of coming back to
circadian disrup ion being present in
100% of mental health issues we can see
where shift workers would be extremely
vulnerable right to mental health issues
given that their variability and we look
at the whoop data it's basically random
in terms of looking at their sleep wake
time it's so variable that it it's like
we can't even see a patter it's
random which is frightening why is that
frightening because you know the more
variability you have like the more
psychological and
physiological uh you know negative
consequences there'll be is there a
correlation here between how we deal
with stressful events in our lives as
well because I'm assuming there must be
absolutely managing stress throughout
the the day uh and and the degree or
even during the night um can uh
definitely increase your tolerance for
stress so you know deploying breath work
for example um as you know on demand
self-regulation tool to pay down in the-
moment stress can be and to activate the
parastic branch of the nervous system
can be really powerful so you know I
kind of call these mini moments of
deactivation so doing that proactively
for folks who are in these high St
Stakes high stress environments is an
amazing strategy um because lots of
those folks again if you think about
just Baseline when you are engaging in
shift work and you're awake during the
night your system is humming at a uh a a
kind of a stress level that is above
what would be normal right like your
your system is having to work so much
harder to maintain homeostasis because
you're doing exactly the opposite of
what your body wants to do so all the
kind of biological preferences are being
um bypassed right when you're up during
the the biological night so to pay down
some of that stress you know these many
moments of deactivation are absolutely
critical for that
population so that means uh just
literally taking 30 seconds where you're
doing the physiological sigh for example
which we know has emerged as being the
most efficacious breath work technique
in the moment to reduce not only in the
moment anxiety and stress but actually
you know your perception of anxiety and
stress like in the future what is that
sign the physiological sigh it's
basically a double inhale followed by an
extended
exhale perfect it's exactly
right so basically like when you're
crying um it it you know you kind of do
that double double inhale all B extended
exhale but that like reduces stress in
the moment in a really powerful way and
if you do that you know five 10 times um
you're end up activating the parastic
branch so you're reducing your heart
rate um and uh and and you know kind of
doing that throughout the day is is a
great way to um mitigate Nega negative
stress accumulation there's a pretty
unfortunate Paradox a pretty tragic
Paradox in the fact that our shift
workers some of them like doctors
especially are the people that we need
to be most focused firing on our
cylinders exactly yeah but those are the
people that are from what I've learned
today about the Circadian rhythm most
likely to suffer with things like focus
and sleep and all of those things that
are imperative to showing up well yeah I
mean there's a relationship you know we
know that with every 45 minutes of sleep
deprivation acur on the W platform we
see a 5 to 10% next day decrease in
mental control mental control executive
function so we we measure this um with
an MC and a Stroop so these kind of uh
performance tests to measure executive
function and we see for every 45 minutes
of sleep dat AC crude we see up to 10%
decrease or decline in next day
executive function and what does
executive function mean for people that
are our ability to make
decisions okay use the word there sleep
debt what is sleep debt so that's
basically what you need versus what you
actually got and that's highly
individual right and and that's one of
the kind of beautiful things on the wo
platform is that we learn your your body
we learn how efficient sleeper you are
we learn what your optimal sleep wake
time should be and we basically tell you
how much time you need to spend in bed
so a lot of the work that my my team has
done specifically at whoop is to try to
understand you know what is this
relationship to of sleep debt to other
performance metrics that we care about
right that tell us a story about
someone's ability to kind of function in
their environment and one of the studies
that we did um was looking specifically
at business Executives so CEO types um
and we we basically looked at um it was
this this one was a six-month study um
looking at two different cohorts uh
both you know I think equal distribution
between men and men and women and and
what we saw was for every 45 minutes of
sleep debt acred in these Business
Leaders we saw a 5 to 10% decrease in
next day executive function so the
leader's ability to make decisions in
the presence of sleep debt um you know
gets gets worse the more sleep debt you
acrew we did a follow-up study and this
one was wild so we basically looked at
um it was roughly it was about 70 uh
business executive CEO types and we
looked at um all of their objective
markers sleep at being one of them and
we look at the psychological safety of
their direct reports during team
meetings and Define psychological safety
you're how um how safe you feel to show
up in your environment as your true most
authentic
self and what we saw is again for every
45 minutes of sleep that the leader had
there was a significant decrease in
psychological safety of the direct
reports so they felt less safe in their
environment to show up as their true
self when their leader had 45 minutes of
sleep debt acred and and some of these
folks were carrying a couple hours of
sleep debt so and there was a linear
relationship between the amount of
psychological safety and the amount of
of sleep that the leader had so and what
was so interesting and compelling about
this research is that the leader had no
idea they couldn't perceive their own
cognitive physical and emotional
declines right but that's what's so
Insidious about sleep deprivation is
that you can't really tell when you're
operating at a lower
level you just adapt to that lower level
of
functioning but everyone around you can
feel it right just with how you hold
hold your face how you emote um the kind
of eye contact you make how tolerant you
are um and you you think about how sleep
deprivation you know it and I think this
is really what this research surfaces
it's just it's not just sleep
deprivation just doesn't impact me right
it's going to impact every single person
I come in contact with and from a
business perspective just from a sheer
like numbers perspective Google um did a
study called Aristotle and they looked
at psych they looked at a bunch of
different metrics related to team
performance and what emerged in that
study is being most predictive of team
performance was the degree to which the
team had psychological safety felt safe
in their environment to kind of show up
as their as their true self and they
brought in to the tune of $4.5 million
more than teams who are lacking
psychological
safety so this is like a really
important concept that I don't think a
lot of people talk about but when we go
back to this concept of the principle of
non-neutrality right and what are
behaviors that promote enable you to
live your values and and kind of show up
as as your your best self as
consistently as possible minimizing
sleep debt is right there at the top of
the list it's fascinating and as it
relates to sort of accident and injury
is there a correlation between sort of
injury of oneself and accidents you
commit on others correlation between
that and sleep debt it's very well
established that um the more sleep that
you're you're carrying you know the more
accident prone you are um you know the
the the the more risk you're going to
take um and uh yeah we see this in in
the medical field we see this um you
know in in you know just car accidents
and yeah it the list goes on and on car
accidents a 2016 study by the foundation
for Traffic Safety found that drivers
who reported that they usually sleep
four to 5 hours per day had
5.4 times the crash rate of drivers who
usually sleep for seven hours or more a
day which is horrifying yeah I know it's
it's uh yeah I mean we look when we
think
about you know sleep it's it's we're not
getting better at it as a society and I
and I think we're we're kind of coming
at this conversation from the long the
wrong lens you know we're telling folks
just to spend more time in bed without
addressing the behaviors that are
actually enabling us to fall asleep and
stay asleep you know that's to me that's
that's the conversation and and it's not
about spending more time in bed and yeah
that might be what needs to happen but
it's it's about you're not going to get
there for folks who who are not thinking
about all the Circadian things that
we're talking about and um you know some
of the environmental stuff the cold dark
the quiet yes that matters but um but at
a foundational level I think folks are
not engaging in the behaviors that are
going to enable us to pay down the sleep
deprivation the other study that I found
that was super interesting um was that a
2021 study found that less than seven
hours of
sleep is associated with increased risk
of injury and if this is sustained for
at least 14 days the risk of muscle and
bone injury is 1.7 times almost two
times higher yeah so as someone that
goes to the gym a lot and likes to work
out if I have a high sleep debt then I'm
much more likely to get an injury almost
two times more likely get injury if
that's sustained that's right which is
crazy yeah it is yeah and you know I'm
so grateful that I think folks are
finally realizing that sleep is the
greatest natural performance enhancer
that we have on this planet um yeah it's
and that is certainly super evident in
all the research that we're doing what
about sleep and
sex sex with a partner is a health
promoting behavior and we have found
that in our in our
research when what research have you
done yeah I we just we actually haven't
published it yet so this is preliminary
preliminary data but um but we people
who um are reporting that they're having
sex uh before bed so within a few hours
of of when they intend to sleep with a
partner have um better markers of sleep
and Recovery you said with a partner
very intentionally there I did yeah we
don't we don't see the same effect um
when folks are are having sex with
without a partner in reporting it how do
you have sex without a partner I mean
that all right I should say a partner
like a spouse or a boyfriend or you know
someone who you're consistently with so
we're not we're talking about I guess
not one night stance sorry I should have
clarified it I thought you meant with
without a human at tool oh God yeah
we're I'm talking about human sex here
yeah does masturbation have the same
implications do I um we didn't we didn't
see big effects with masturbation are
people reporting that they're onop they
sure are they are I should say that it
is complet completely optional to track
so people can opt into tracking these
things again it is completely
deidentified we have no ability to to
know who's doing what in terms of
Journal tracking and behaviors um but uh
yeah so we don't actually see uh any big
effects with with masturbation and any
markers of sleep and recovery so no no
strong no strong effects there we said
something earlier about exercising
before bed now if I have sex before bed
and you
know it lasts a long time time
yeah is that not then going to produce a
ton of adrenaline and wake me up again
so after so it depends if you
ejaculate then um you will then release
oxytocin which is kind of a
calming chemical so guys typically after
they ejaculate feel sleepy because of
the release of of oxytocin but then that
goes back to my point about masturbation
don't you really oxytocin when you
masturbate yeah I think I think the
oxytocin is about connection okay right
so it's it's that's I think that's and
that might be why we see these strong
effects when you're having sex with a
partner or a spouse
um is is that you're you're getting this
benefit of this this beautiful
connection with your partner and and
spouse provided it goes well um and then
you release this oxytocin which is you
know kind of makes you feel uh connected
and safe and um so all of those I think
those that kind of condition uh helps I
think you fall asleep and and
potentially stay asleep it does make
sense because I do get very very tired
after I've had sex with my partner and
I've always wondered why that is I don't
know that women uh it seems to have
women want to maybe stay up and snuggle
and talk a little bit more after sex
so but but guys it seems get sleepy and
want to fall asleep
and all want to run off a bit of a
stereotype that goes back quite far
prehistorically as you know this podcast
is sponsored by whoop and people often
ask me why I chose whoop over all of the
possible wearable options and I've tried
many of them but whoop for me stands out
for several reasons a because of its
noninvasive design B Because of its
unique analytics and C a membership
model that continually evolves with the
product but the biggest GameChanger for
me which is reason d is wop's ability to
Foster meaningful Behavior change for me
with whoop I've been more attuned than
ever before on how my daily activities
can impact my sleep and stress levels
and their features like the whoop coach
feature which they recently announced
and the journal and the weekly planner
Have Been instrumental in helping me to
maintain health and fitness habits that
I previously struggled to achieve
consistency with if you're looking to
improve your health and fitness this
year Beyond January then you've got to
give whoop a try go to join. whoop.com /
CEO and you'll be able to get whooped
for 30 days risk-free with zero
commitment and let me know how you get
on quick one we are working with an
exciting new sponsor on this podcast
Shopify I'm sure you guys have heard of
Shopify if you haven't been living under
a rock but for those that don't know
Shopify is a Commerce platform
revolutionizing millions of businesses
worldwide it is pretty incredible they
provide everything you need to start
your business and it's super simple to
get started and to get your business out
there here at the D SEO we've used
Shopify for a variety of our different
product drops the latest being the
conversation cards and without the help
of Shopify that wouldn't have been
possible it's mine and my team's goto
website for all things Commerce related
so I'm giving you guys the chance to
trial Shopify for $1 that's right $1
sign up for a $1 trial for a month by
searching shopify.com
Bartlet all lowercase keep it to
yourself and let me know how you get on
the other thing I I would love to talk
to you about because it's become a huge
Obsession in my life is this word guess
it's not a word it's an acronym HRV
heart rate variability been become
absolutely obsessed with it maybe a
little bit too obsessed with it one
might argue I just check it every day so
the first thing I do when I wake up in
the morning is I look at it yeah um just
to understand how my body has recovered
from the night before right um what is
HRV it's most simply the time interval
between Heartbeats
and um it's a function of the heart but
it uh originates in the autonomic
nervous system and as we talked about
the autonomic nervous system has two
branches the parasympathetic and the
sympathetic Paras sympatic thr and
digest sympathetic is you know fight or
flight and they're both competing to
send signals to the heart when you are
super recovered your your heart is going
to be responsive to both branches of
that autonomic nervous system in a very
kind of um Dynamic way so so whatever
you want to do and what's happening in
your environment you're able to
basically make a match the more
recovered you are that makes sense so um
you're be able to respond and react to
environmental stress and in kind of a a
more High performing way I suppose is
the best way to say it so um heart
variability is is kind of a measure of
that ability to adapt to your
environment in a functional way and a
high har variability which is more
varying beats
heartbeats is is better yeah more
variability the better so higher hearty
variability should be correlated with uh
a better adaptation to environmental
stress so a low heart rate variability
would sound something like this boom
boom boom that's exactly right very very
consistent not good right a high heart
rate variability will sound like bum bum
bum bum boom so really varied perfect
beautiful paral that variation is is
better yeah You' think that if something
was consistent yeah it would be better I
know in all other cases it is but in the
case of heart R variability it's very
counterintuitive and what's great is
hearty variability is is modifiable to a
degree um you know what's what's a good
what's an average heart rate variability
so it's all based on genetics it's
really tough right cuz I don't know what
your heart rate ability was when you
were born right so I don't I don't know
like what your
potential for heart R variability is and
and I think
that's the only thing that I think we
can say and I think how people need to
think about it is when you come on to a
you know the woot platform for example
you're going to get your your hearty
variability you're going to develop a
baseline And I think what people need to
understand is that every Behavior you've
every choice you've kind of made leading
up to that moment is going to determine
like your Baseline hearty variability so
if you you know drink and take drugs and
have a lot of childhood trauma um that
might actually yield a lower Baseline
heart variability relative to your own
potential right um so it's it's it's
very hard to compare because of all of
that um but then just genetics heart
size um gender like all those things a
biological sex all those things have an
impact on
um on your heart variability on your
Baseline so you don't want to compare
there's no good um that said I think the
higher the better generally what what's
the average well it depends on age so it
decreases you know every year your heart
variability is going to decrease um much
a bit I think it's like 3 to four% or
something that's terrifying I really
which is kind of a lotas the average on
Theo platform you know from the 20 to 30
year olds is somewhere in the tune of of
kind of 65 70
30 to 40 year olds a little bit lower 40
to 50s you it's kind of in the 50s range
I think so definitely gets worse as you
age but I think why people are obsessed
about it is it's just it is a really
good marker of just the overall state of
your mental physical and emotional
health do women and men have variance in
their heart they do yeah so generally
men would have um uh higher heart R
variability than women I think at
Baseline your heart size I'm trying to
get my heart rate variability
up what what are the most important
things for me to be thinking about CU
I've it seems to be a bit of a mystery
this heart rate variability thing so
there's definitely some things that will
directly impact your heart rate
variability sleep wake time so
stabilizing when you go a to wake up
yeah um wake wake onset being kind of
the number one priority you want to wake
up at a regular time every single day
you want to get a huge ballus of light
as soon as you wake up you want to get a
lot of natural light during the day okay
all these things are going to impact
inflammation and cortisol like all the
the things that are kind of circulating
in our body that um we need to be
circulating and we're not doing some of
these behaviors they're not circulating
in our body which have negative
Downstream effects um you want to
mitigate stress throughout the day so um
you know stress is not bad um but we
need to proactively uh manage bouts of
stress with appropriate levels of rest
right when we are
going going going and um we can only
sustain that for so long so just being
proactive with stress rest Cycles
throughout the day really important as
we go we want to eat a bulk of our
calories in the morning you know lots
and lots of protein um we want to make
sure that we get lots of protein I think
folks don't probably get enough protein
um want to get lots of protein um bias
early in the day um stop eating a few
hours before bedtime make sure you're
hydrated throughout the day um yes
absolutely so I can go down a very deep
Rabbit Hole in terms of optimal training
protocols but but in some um we want to
make sure that we're uh polarizing our
training in that we're doing you know
zone five which is you know kind of Max
effort where we're out of breath a
couple times a week okay two to three
times a week and then we want to do zone
two which is kind of um um you know just
a a lowlevel you know 60% of our max
heart rate we want to do that for you
know 200 to 300 minutes per week which I
know sounds like a lot the the
recommendations 150 minutes I think it's
a little I don't think that's enough
frankly but um if we're talking about
optimizing heart variability that would
be the protocol we want to strength
train a few times a week that would be a
way to maximize interplay between the
cardiovascular and the nervous system
right there is definitely way to train
to do that and what I just described
will kind of get you there roughly so we
talked about time restricted eating or
stopping our feeding with know three
times before uh three hours before we
intend to sleep huge um no alcohol
obviously again if we're interested in
optimizing our ability to adapt to
environmental stress that is and improve
our Harry variability um really
important we we we obstain um for
alcohol and then I would say you know
spending sufficient time in bed is be
really important that is not
accumulating uh sleep
debt what about having friends yes
connection you know folks being around
individuals who support your values um
is absolutely essential we talked a
little about exercise there but there's
also just like the general sedentary of
Our Lives I I I was looking at some
research a couple of years ago which I
included in my first book which shows
that we're get in the Western World
we're getting increasingly more sedent
it's kind of like this downward graph
that just shows every year people move
less because we've got Ubers now and we
have we're working more in offices and
we're working even more from home now
and we're optimizing activity out of our
lives and surely that has an implication
for heart variability as well there's no
question that sedentary Behavior you
know I think where we go wrong is we
think I can wake up and work out for an
hour and then that gives me license to
sit for the rest of the day but but we
know that for individuals who are
sitting for more than 4 hours in a row
so Consolidated sitting for 4our
blocks um is associated with increased
mortality rates so four hours of
sedentary Behavior which you know
Consolidated right so the ideal protocol
if we want to um you know basically uh
improve all these parameters of Health
that we're talking about specifically
card variability you want to break up
your sedentary time so every you know
half an hour to an hour you'd want to
get up move around for 5 minutes or so
and then get back to your
work in 2020 you wrote an article where
you offered five ways to improve our HRV
and HRV as I say is super important
because it's linked to all of these
Health markers it's linked to immunity
it's linked to all of these things that
really really matter um and one of the
there was a couple of sort of surprising
suggestions you made in that article one
of them was about practicing
gratitude yeah I mean I think I think
what the research says is that
actually receiving gratitude um has the
most uh powerful effect on our on our
mood and our feelings of well-being so
if I were to receive a thank you letter
for example and really internalize that
like that's going to have the biggest
long-term effect on my feelings of of of
well-being um but there's also great
resarch that shows giving um thanks as
well and expressing gratitude um also
has you know lots of positive
implications for our psychological
functioning and I guess this brings into
Focus the psychological element of
health and HRV and all and sleep and all
these things that we've talked about
like Stress and Anxiety you're currently
finishing a PhD in Psychology right
that's right
yes and again it links to something that
was written in that article as well
where you talk about a growth mindset
again that's psychology yes why does
this matter this growth mindset thing
this you know gratitude psychology why
does that matter yeah I mean it I think
it relates to just our you know whether
or not we feel that growth in the future
is
possible you know do we do we feel like
we have the potential to grow and to
learn and do we feel optimistic about
the future I mean that's really what
growth mindset is right right and and
you can imagine if you don't feel
optimistic about the future you don't
feel like growth is possible you feel
really Limited in your capabilities
right and you feel Limited in your your
happiness so I think that yeah there's I
think a really strong connection between
you know believing that the the future
is is positive and and that is going to
manifest in in in a measure like heart
variability you know it's going to it's
going to manifest
physiologically I there's this um author
called sha Anker oh Shan Aker yeah from
Harvard his name yeah AER he does a lot
of work on this idea of growth mindset
as a way to sort of counteract stress
which I find fascinating he does yeah he
found that doctors in a positive State
of Mind perform diagnoses 19% faster and
more accurately than doctors that are
neutral and he also found that positive
employees are 31% more
productive than negative
employees
yeah and I and I and I think our life
circumstance you know kind of certainly
can tilt us in one direction or another
but I I do think that we have a a
genetic predisposition to you know the
cup is uh half empty versus half full
you know I think there's something to to
that to that research and that
literature but all the things that we're
talking
about I think provide a foundation right
so a lot of the physiological stuff that
we're talking about this Cadian stuff
the sleep stuff the recovery stuff right
the Stress Management you know when
we're eating our food the how we're
training right all of these things kind
of position us to I think
leverage our our mindset um in in a way
that is the most productive right when
we're not kind of taking care of these
physiological things you know we don't
feel like we have purpose talked about
this we don't feel the skills and
resources to do the things that we want
to do in our life um it's really hard to
talk ourselves into a better future
right um and and and it's it's hard to
kind of move around our our mindset but
if we can just kind of attend to some of
these physiological and psychological
things we can actually start to take
more control of our mindset so I think a
lot of times this is I think frustrating
in the field of psychology we we talk
about how we talk about grow mindset
without actually talking about the
behaviors that actually underpin that
you know and and and that's I think a
lot of the work that I'm trying to do is
is that you know there's there's these
core influences physiological and
psychological that if we can understand
and build an infrastructure to allow
those those kind of behaviors to come to
life in our every day we're in a
position then to have like a growth
mindset right but without that that that
Foundation of good habits and good
behaviors good habits and behaviors it's
hard to believe that the the future is
is bright brings into question something
that I know a lot of people think when
they hear conversations like this they
think oh but I just don't have the
motivation Christen you know and there's
this ongoing conversation about which
comes first is it the action or is it
the motivation there's clearly in my
life I've seen this clear two-way link
by through what I do and how I feel and
how I feel and what I do yeah so if I
want to influence the other I do the
other I if I want to feel great I have
to focus on my actions and if I want to
act great I have I focus on how I feel
for example you know what I mean
um cuz people hear you know the
discipline that you practice in your
life and they go God you must have so
much motivation you know the people that
are watching junk TV at 3:00 a.m. in the
morning and eating junk food at 3: a. in
the morning they look at you and go just
got just she just got something I just
haven't got so I can't relate you know I
can't become a
Christian what is the message those
people need to hear the ones that feel
like motivation is their problem m
I mean I think it's
understanding how do we actually produce
energy right because that's
really at the core of what motivation is
right it's it's it's it's the energy
right and and a couple things influence
our energy production or put a ceiling
on
motivation it's called um well it's
appraisal so how we um how relevant we
think a task
is
and and then how we are perceiving the
task is it hard is it easy is it
challenging right so appraisal and
perception are going to work together to
put a ceiling on your potential for
motivation okay so appraisal I hear is
being like the why like why this matters
totally that's how relevant is it to me
so interesting because in my book I
wrote this thing called the discipline
equation and I think
you know I think you've kind of
summarized it a little bit there yeah
yeah yeah definitely I mean this is well
understood right in the field of of
psychology and and Physiology that yeah
you you we all have potential motivation
and the and the two things that move
around is how we appraise a situation
and how we perceive it so in my
discipline equation this is the equation
discipline equals the strength of one's
y plus the reward of the pursuit minus
the cost of the pursuit perfect I love
that yeah that's beautiful um and and I
think that would hold that holds up
clearly um book yeah than glad
you said that yeah no it for sure but I
I think and I I I would I say you know
one of the reasons why I think my teams
were always so successful is I just
deployed that principle over and over
again in my environment how I helped my
my athletes understand the why their
personal why like why were they showing
up every single day to the field how is
that attached to their individual values
not my team values to their personal
values right and then I made the
environment challenging right so they
get get excited about the work that
they're doing every day right and I try
to do that on an individual level and
that's why a lot of teams underperform
frankly is that they don't leaders don't
understand the relationship between um
appraisal and perception like I
literally think if you can understand
that and you've written a book about it
right so people can read this book and
if leaders can adopt that and understand
the importance of setting of creating an
infrastructure where you tap into the
person's individual values and how that
relates to the task you have motivation
like you will you will increase the
ceiling for potential motivation it
makes me think in some ways that people
listening to this right now are without
knowing it in a upward
reinforcing spiral towards the person
they want to be or in a downward
reinforcing spiral away from the person
they want to be because if if you're
showing up and acting in the right way
then you're going to release energy
you're going to feel good which means
you have a better chance of showing up
and acting in the right way and that
Spiral goes upwards but if you're
showing up in the wrong way it means
you're probably going to be a little bit
depressed you're you're going to be have
a lot of circadian disruption you're not
going to feel great which means you have
less chance of showing up in the right
way the energy low energy all of those
things it's a downward spiral so if
you're in that downward spiral I would I
would guess the way the only way to
break out of it I mean is you listen to
a podcast but that's not going to help
you break out of it alone it's gonna
start with you T making one different
decision yeah at one point and that can
be a tiny tiny tiny decision yeah and
and I think that's like a lot of the
work I I'm doing right now is trying to
figure out what is that actual taxonomy
though if someone really wants to make
change where do they start where did
they start you know I'm going to say it
sleep wake time like wake up at the same
time every day and get as much as light
as humanly possible within that will set
the tone for the rest of the day and put
you in a position where you can fall
asleep at a regular time night after
night like you have to address that the
second thing is I would consolidate your
eating window you know keep it within a
10-hour time frame eat all of your
calories within a 10-hour time frame and
try to leave a couple hour buffer
between when you attend to sleep and
your last calorie like just those two
things things are pretty low barrier to
entry right and that will increase mood
you'll improve your body composition
right just by naring that window you
will you know all the effects that we
talked about in terms of the cardio
metabolic effects from just stabilizing
sleep wake time the mood effects from
stabilizing sleep awake time that will
back you into having a better
relationship with light right which we
know light is at the core of human
health and
functioning so those two things I would
I would say is the place to start um and
there and I think the downstream effect
of just those two things is is is pretty
profound and then I you know I think in
in parallel just figuring out who who do
you actually want to be in the
world like what is your what do you want
your identity to be you know and I and I
don't know that
people actually think enough about that
you there's so many distractions in this
world I mean we can just drown ourselves
with just stuff that's is just coming at
us content all the time and we we can't
discern we haven't done the work to be
able to discern what what is what is
actually important to us like we don't
have the capacity to direct our thoughts
and our attention in a way that's
rewarding right because we we haven't
built that skill or that muscle so I
think like getting that under control is
another way is is like really figuring
out what is my relationship with
technology like what do I want that to
be you know how do I actually want to
spend
my my my
time have you written that down for sure
absolutely and what format does that
take or what medium did you use is that
a vision board or something oh just like
yeah pen and paper I mean I have yeah I
mean I Evernote you know I I I revisit
this quarterly um you know what do I
value what do I care about how do I want
to spend my time and that has been the
basis for which I make all my decisions
what does your Evan note say oh I mean
in terms of like my how I think well I
have my list of of values right that it
always starts there right is what are
your values so growth impact tolerance
compassion and presence um those are my
top five values and I and I I meditate
on those I whenever I you know I'll look
for I have some of my favorite authors
that have written extensively about all
those different things like you know
James Baldwin on compassion and
tolerance and um um Ein ran on on impact
and and growth I I love her work but
yeah I mean I think really connecting to
what do those beliefs and values
actually look like in action right if I
don't know what what what growth looks
like if I don't know what tolerance
looks like in action how do I actually
play that out in my in in my in my
day-to-day right so you have to you have
to write about it you have to
internalize it and then have to practice
that behavior right so in in my Evernote
is it's I have a kind of like what does
this look like in action like what are
the things that I can do that I can
practice to live these values and then
it's having an outlet for those things
what what kind of things do I need to do
you know like my PhD that's not a goal I
don't have any goals like goals are
total BS in my view it's it's like
living your values like the P my PhD
allows me to live my values of of growth
and impact right if if I want to be if I
want to impact Health at scale I need to
have the credibility I need to know how
to run experiments I need to be a
scientist right and and so it's not yeah
the I'm reaching this goal of getting a
PhD but it's allowing me to live my
values of growth and
impact and and I think that's where
folks kind of get it wrong is they're
like I want to run a 10K and then what
happens after you run the 10K and and I
use that principle in in my life like
I'm not it's it's like I'm always just
trying to live my values and I and I and
I don't evaluate success on like
achieving something it it's all about my
scorecard is am I living my values to my
fullest like that to me is a win and
that's how I evaluated my environment
when I was coaching collegiately it was
like are we living our
values and when you do that you you kind
of always you always win you
know and I it has a you know kind of
second order effect in terms of how you
think about competition right like
that's another area where like I don't
compete I stopped competing a decade and
a half ago like we wouldn't even like
our when you know my team at Princeton
like these are just little things but
when we talk about going back to like in
infrastructure to support your values
like we didn't even list our opponents
like I didn't want want them thinking
about how I don't want them like
changing how they acted throughout the
week how they trained the quality what
they did behaviorally based on our
opponent that didn't matter right if you
want to perform
consistently you need to you know show
up every single day with quality right
and and being willing to apply yourself
in a way that um is going to you know
create the output um that leads to the
kind of quality that allows you to
replicate you know performance levels
and it's it's about Learning and
Development and it wasn't about an
opponent right and that's why that's why
teams
underperform right that's why
individuals underperform is they've got
this arbitrary kind of metric that
they're or like team that they want to
beat that they're focused on right or
person that they want to be that they're
focused on instead of looking okay what
is my bar like and and going back to
question am I actually living my
values I think everything kind of works
itself out if you can just do
that Kristen we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for the question that has been left
for
you what is the last thing that you
would say and I imagine the context
there and this is just me taking a guess
is that if there was a last thing that
you had to say what is the last thing
that you would say I think figure out
who you want to be in the
world and
then set up your life so you can be that
person Kristen thank you so incredibly
inspiring in so many ways I you know I
would I would promote whoop but I feel
like you already have um just by being
so inspiring so smart so wise and that's
I mean everything that whoop is in a
nutshell
um there's so many thank yous that I
want to give you for so many different
reasons but I think the most important
thank you that I'll give you is for both
the hundreds and thousands of lives that
your work has nudged in a better
Direction and transformed in many cases
but also for the millions and millions
and hundreds of millions of lives that
you're going to nudge in a much better
Direction over the course of the next
decade and decade and decade and decade
um it's a a tremendous service to
humanity having the potential service to
humanity having the skills the
storytelling abilities the wisdom and
that deep innate sense of drive that you
have and it is a service to humanity
that Humanity increasingly unfortunately
needs um and I'm so excited to to watch
that play out for you I I deeply believe
this is the very start of your journey
in many respects even though you're
several decades into the work that you
do but there something tells me that
this is just the beginning so Kristen
thank you for your generosity thank you
for your wisdom and thank you for your
time appreciate you I appreciate you so
much Stephen thank you for all your good
[Music]
work as you guys know I'm a big fan of
hu I'm an investor in the company and
they sponsor this podcast and what I've
done for you is I've put together for
those people especially that haven't yet
tried H but for all of those also that
have but haven't tried my favorite
products I put together what I call the
hu Steven bundle which is a selection of
my favorite products from hu including
the Black Edition salted caramel flavor
which is super high in protein and has
17 servings per container the bundle
also comes with their ready to drink
product which is one of my all-time
favorite products from hu it is
convenient it is nutritionally complete
and on those days when my life just gets
very very busy it is my go-to product
you've got your hu bars which are
absolutely gorgeous and in there you
also get this incredible t-shirt which
is apparently according to lots of my
friends the best quality t-shirt they've
ever had and I don't really know why but
there's something about this t-shirt
that's incredibly flattering this hule
shaker the link is in the description
below in this podcast episode wherever
you're listening to it there'll be a
Stevens bundle link and check it
out do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description below I know you'll
enjoy
[Music]
it m